On the fourteenth of June, at two o’clock in the morning, the sovereign, having summoned Balashov and read him his letter to Napoleon, ordered him to carry this letter and hand it personally to the French emperor. Sending Balashov on his way, the sovereign again repeated to him the words that he would not make peace so long as even one armed enemy remained on Russian soil, and ordered him to convey these words to Napoleon without fail. The sovereign did not include them in the letter, because he felt, with his innate tact, that it would be inappropriate to convey these words at the moment when a last attempt at reconciliation was being made; but he told Balashov to convey them without fail to Napoleon in person.

Having set out that same night, accompanied by a bugler and two Cossacks, Balashov reached the French outposts at the village of Rykonty, on the Russian side of the Niemen, at dawn. He was stopped by French cavalry sentinels.

A French hussar under-officer in a raspberry-colored uniform and shaggy hat shouted to the approaching Balashov, ordering him to stop. Balashov did not stop at once, but went on moving slowly down the road.

The under-officer, frowning and muttering some abuse, thrust his horse’s breast towards Balashov, took hold of his saber, and shouted rudely at the Russian general, asking him if he was deaf and had not heard what he was told. Balashov gave his name. The under-officer sent a soldier for an officer.

Paying no attention to Balashov, the under-officer started talking with his comrades about regimental matters and did not glance at the Russian general.

It was extremely strange for Balashov, after his closeness to the highest power and might, after his conversation three hours earlier with the sovereign, and generally in the habit of being honored in his service, to see here, on Russian soil, this hostile, and above all disrespectful, treatment of him by brute force.

The sun was just beginning to rise behind the clouds; the air was fresh and dewy. A herd of cattle was being driven down the road from the village. From the fields, one by one, trilling larks sprayed up like bubbles in water.

Balashov looked around him, awaiting the arrival of the officer from the village. The Russian Cossacks, and the bugler, and the French hussars silently glanced at each other now and then.

A French hussar colonel, obviously just out of bed, came riding from the village on a handsome, well-fed gray horse, accompanied by two hussars. The officer, the soldiers, and their horses had a contented and foppish look.

This was that initial period of a campaign when the troops still find themselves in good order, almost on the level of a peacetime review of maneuvers, only with a tinge of warlike showiness in their dress, and with a moral tinge of that gaiety and enthusiasm that always accompany the beginning of a campaign.

The French colonel had a hard time stifling his yawns, but was courteous, and evidently realized the full significance of Balashov. He led him past his soldiers behind the line and informed him that his wish to be presented to the emperor would probably be fulfilled at once, because, as far as he knew, the emperor’s quarters were close by.

They rode through the village of Rykonty, past French hussar tethering posts, sentinels, and soldiers, who saluted their colonel and looked with curiosity at the Russian uniform, and came out on the other side of the village. According to the colonel, they were a mile and a half from the commander of the division, who would receive Balashov and take him to his destination.

The sun had already risen and shone gaily on the bright greenery.

They had just ridden up a hill past a tavern, when a bunch of horsemen appeared, riding towards them from the foot of the hill, at the head of whom, on a black horse, its trappings gleaming in the sun, rode a tall man in a plumed hat, with black, curled, shoulder-length hair, in a red mantle, his long legs thrust forward, as Frenchmen ride. This man galloped to meet Balashov, his plumes flying, his jewels and gold galloons shining in the bright June sun.

Balashov was just two lengths away from the horseman riding to meet him with a theatrically solemn face, in bracelets, plumes, necklaces, and gold, when Ulner, the French colonel, whispered respectfully: “le roi de Naples.” Indeed, it was Murat, who was now called the Neapolitan king. Though it was completely incomprehensible why he was the Neapolitan king, he was called that, and he was fully convinced of it himself, and therefore had a still more solemn and important air than before. He was so sure that he was indeed the Neapolitan king, that when, on the eve of his departure from Naples, while strolling with his wife through the streets of the city, several Italians had cried “Viva il re!” he had turned to his wife with a sad smile and said: “Les malheureux, ils ne savent pas que je les quitte demain!”

But though he firmly believed that he was the Neapolitan king and was sorry for the grief of the subjects he was abandoning, lately, after being called back into the service, and especially after meeting Napoleon in Danzig, when his august brother-in-law had said to him: “Je vous ai fait Roi pour r&#233;gner &#224; ma mani&#232;re, mais pas &#224; la v&#244;tre” —he had cheerfully taken up his familiar business and, as a well-fed but not yet fat horse, still fit for work, feeling itself in harness, begins to frolic in the shafts, he, having dressed up as gaudily and expensively as possible, cheerful and content, went riding down the roads of Poland, not knowing where or why himself.

Seeing the Russian general, he threw back his head with its curled, shoulder-length hair in a kingly manner and gave the French colonel a questioning glance. The colonel deferentially conveyed to his majesty the meaning of Balashov, whose family name he could not pronounce.

“De Bal-mach&#232;ve!” said the king (overcoming by his resoluteness the difficulty that the colonel was faced with), “charm&#233; de faire votre connaissance, g&#233;n&#233;ral,” he added with a gesture of kingly graciousness. As soon as the king began to speak loudly and quickly, all his kingly dignity instantly left him, and, not noticing it himself, he went over to his proper tone of good-natured familiarity. He placed his hand on the withers of Balashov’s horse.

“Eh bien, g&#233;n&#233;ral, tout est &#224; la guerre, &#224; ce qu’il parait,” he said as if regretting the circumstance, of which he could not judge.

“Sire,” replied Balashov, “l’Empereur mon ma&#238;tre ne d&#233;sire point la guerre, et comme Votre Majest&#233; le voit,” said Balashov, using Votre Majest&#233; at every turn, with inevitably affected frequency, addressing the person for whom this title was still a novelty.

Murat’s face beamed with stupid satisfaction as he listened to Monsieur de Balachoff. But royaut&#233; oblige: he felt it necessary to discuss state affairs with Alexander’s envoy as a king and ally. He dismounted and, taking Balashov by the arm and moving a few steps away from the suite, who waited respectfully, began walking up and down with him, trying to speak significantly. He mentioned that the emperor Napoleon was offended by the demand to withdraw his troops from Prussia, especially now, when the demand had become known to everybody and the dignity of France was offended by it. Balashov said that there was nothing offensive in this demand, because…Murat interrupted him:

“So you don’t consider the emperor Alexander the instigator?” he said unexpectedly with a good-naturedly stupid smile.

Balashov told him why he actually supposed that the initiator of the war was Napoleon.

“Eh, mon cher g&#233;n&#233;ral,” Murat interrupted him again, “je d&#233;sire de tout mon coeur que les Empereurs s’arrangent entre eux, et que la guerre commenc&#233;e malgr&#233; moi se termine le plut&#244;t possible,” he said in the tone of a conversation between servants who wish to remain good friends despite a quarrel between their masters. And he went on to ask about the grand duke, about his health, and to reminisce about the gay and amusing time he spent with him in Naples. Then, as if suddenly recollecting his royal dignity, Murat straightened up solemnly, assumed the same pose he had at his coronation, and with a wave of the right hand, said: “Je ne vous retiens plus, g&#233;n&#233;ral; je souhaite le succ&#232;s de votre mission” —and, his embroidered red mantle and plumes flying and his precious stones glittering, he went towards the suite that was respectfully waiting for him.

Balashov rode on, supposing from Murat’s words that he would quite soon be introduced to Napoleon himself. But instead of meeting Napoleon soon, he was detained by sentinels of Davout’s infantry corps at the next village, as he had been at the front line, and the summoned adjutant of the corps commander took him to the village to Marshal Davout.
